---
layout: page
<!--type: cheat_sheet-->
title: Storing and protecting data during the project
search_exclude: false
contributors: [Korbinian Bösl]
page_id: support_04_store_protect
description: Supporting DMP Information, data storage, data backup
sidebar: dmp_supporting_info
dsw:
- name: Storing and protecting data during the project
  uuid: knowledge-models/elixir.no:dsw-km-bott-localization:latest/preview?questionUuid=b11a3987-d7fa-4e9e-9ab5-48a6f2ffc2b0
cessda:
- name: Data storage in social science
  url: https://dmeg.cessda.eu/Data-Management-Expert-Guide/4.-Store/Storage
- name: File naming and folder structure in social science
  url: https://dmeg.cessda.eu/Data-Management-Expert-Guide/2.-Organise-Document/Designing-a-data-file-structure
rdmkit:
- name: Data storage in life science
  url: https://rdmkit.elixir-europe.org/storage
- name: Data organisation in life science
  url: https://rdmkit.elixir-europe.org/data_organisation
---

{% include callout.html type="tip" content="
**Why is this topic important**\\
>> Data storage is a central part of your project and loss of data might endanger it.\\
>> The chosen data storage solution has to comply with legal requirements and local policies.\\
>> Optimised data storage and organisation can speed up your project and save costs.\\
" %}

## About this chapter

This chapters collects information about data storage and backup throughout the research project. Consider all digital data that you are expecting to handle in the course of the project, including working documents.

If specific solutions are chosen during data processing and analysis or preservation, this may be specified in the respective chapters.

## Storage guidelines
Institutions commonly have a storage guide that explains available infrastructure and which data can be stored where.

Institutional storage guides:
* [UiB Storage guide](https://www.uib.no/en/foremployees/153608/storage-guide)
* [UiO Data storage guide](https://www.uio.no/english/services/it/security/lsis/storage-guide.html)
* [NTNU Data storage guide](https://i.ntnu.no/wiki/-/wiki/English/Data+storage+guide)
* [UiT Research data portal - Processing and storage](https://en.uit.no/research/research-dataportal/art?p_document_id=729174)

In collaboration projects there might be multiple guidelines of relevance for your project.

## Expected total volume of data in the project

It is good to estimate the total data volume as early as possible in order to budget for connected costs. You should also consider that you might produce intermediate data that also requires space.

For some domains there might be existing guides to estimate the data volume generated by instruments. (e.g. for [Life Science data: Illumina  Approximate sizes of sequencing run output folders](https://support.illumina.com/bulletins/2018/01/approximate-sizes-of-sequencing-run-output-folders.html), [Publication: Numerical Compression Schemes for Proteomics Mass Spectrometry Data](https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.O114.037879))

## Temporarily archiving of data sets (e.g. to tape)

Temporarily archiving can be a great solution for your project if you produce very large data volumes or if the project is collecting data over a long period but will only be analysed later. Data that is 
One potential issue might be that the access time to the archived data might be longer and has to be planned.


## Storage solutions

It is important to keep track of the storage solutions used in the project. Usually this section will be populated with solutions provided in the institutional storage guide. This is also a good opportunity to reflect on the data backup from its location, potentially associated costs and whether the information security level and certification of the solution match with the stored data. 
How the members of your project access the data and how access is controlled can be crucial. The overall capacity and transfer speed of a storage solution can be critical parameters in case you have larger amounts of data.
You should also consider if a more advanced way to organise your data, such as object storage or databases might be of help for your project.

## File naming and organisation

Consistent file naming and folder structures are an important part of organising data in your research project. It is critical to be consistent and to make all of your project partners following the same convention.

There are different strategies for file naming and folder structure. Please consult the chapters in e.g. the [RDMkit for life sciences or the CESSDA Data Management Guide](support_04_store_protect#further-resources)  for inspiration.

## Risk evaluation

There are different risk considerations for your project you might want to carry out depending on the nature of your project. Some practises like carrying physical storage media can be associated with increased risks or violate regulation and laws. Thus project members should be informed about the risks and the risks should be mitigated where possible.
